---
layout: post
title: "Will AI Agents Be Part of the Future?"
date: 2024-11-16
author: Terry Chen
---
Ever since Spring 2024, the conversation has centered on agents. While I agree that agentic workflows can help us accomplish more complicated, multi-step processes via language models, I'm uncertain about the place AI agents have in our future. Agents are programs that can perceive environmental cues and take actions to achieve specific goals. Yet their defining characteristics—autonomy, perception, decision-making, and task completion—can be found in many tech products that predated GPT (thermostats, chatbots, home assistants). Hence, I feel that AI agents might be merely a marketing scheme to add spark to the diminishing appeal of "customized GPTs" and the poorly received "GPT Store."

However, I'm not opposed to agents. Rather than having an arsenal of AI agents to complete each task, I think a more likely scenario would be one in which a central agent (similar to Samantha from the movie "Her") acquires new skills based on the user's needs and desires. In practice, this would mean developing standard operating procedures for repetitive tasks based on human instruction and example-setting (with human-in-the-loop intervention for unexpected cases), and function calling/tool use for acquiring different skill trees. Ultimately, the value of such a tool lies not in the number of tasks it can perform somewhat adequately, but in its level of understanding of the user and reliability in assigned tasks. In other words, predictive analytics would remain a central theme, with flawless execution of repetitive everyday tasks built on top of it.