---
title: "Courage to be last"
date: 2024-10-26
author: Terry Chen
---
Reflecting on my list of failed projects, very few failed due to lack of innovation. Since I began working with LLMs in fall 2022, there has been an abundance of interesting GenAI technologies to experiment with. It started with "domain specific prompting/finetuning" and data flywheels (thou not even now does anyone know what this looks like in action). By spring 2023, the focus shifted to LLMs as agents, exemplified by the Generative Agents paper, Microsoft AutoGen, and a few opensource projects like MetaGPT. At Cogno, we also built multi-agent systems, integrating various function calling features and agent collaboration for complex task reasoning. Everyone built, few created value (Glean focused on enterprise search, while Moveworks created value through api actions, neither of which I believe agents to have mattered). Founders encouraged each other's enthusiasm, while investors rushed to learn the latest buzzwords in LLM technology ('prompt engineering' and 'function calls' sounded less sexy compared to'agents').

Being first to market rarely matters - people won't remember you. What matters is creating defensible moats or developing critical elements that lead to unfair advantages. While Google's technology investment in Android can be considered 'not just building a moat, but scorching the earth for 250 miles around the castle,' most companies' self-described technological differentiation is merely self-flattery and a feeble attempt to impress tech-enthusiast investors. Technology truly matters only when it can solve seemingly insurmountable challenges or optimize costs and operations. In every other situation, the focus should be on building sustainable advantages that ensure long-term survival. [Thoughts WIP]
