---
title: "From What should we do with our brain? to Morphing intelligence"
date: 2022-12-01
author: Terry Chen
---

From What should we do with our brain? to Morphing intelligence: How does Malabou’s analysis of biological plasticity and technological flexibility invite or impede understanding of the difference between humans and artificial intelligence?

With the appearance of synaptic chips, artificial intelligence (AI) has experienced epigenetic transformation analogous to the biological process (Malabou, 2021). From the invention of IBM’s blue brain (Dharmendra, 2011) to the more recent development of OpenAI’s ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), AI has grown to be capable of executing complex tasks and self-optimizing through environmental feedback. In light of this, Catherine Malabou authored Morphing intelligence as a critique to her previous book What should we do with our brain?, stating that the difference between biological plasticity and technological flexibility at the heart of her earlier book did not exist. However, if such an argument were true, is it still possible to differentiate humans from AI? This raises the question: How does Malabou’s perspective on biological plasticity and technological flexibility facilitate or impede understanding of the difference between humans and AI? To understand the difference between humans and AI, we must explore their epigenetic process beyond surface level metaphors and recognize the role of consciousness in dictating human action.

Firstly, Malabou’s analysis of biological plasticity provides a framework upon which we may begin to analyze intelligence and consciousness in humans. According to Malabou, the self is the result of the order of neuronal networks that comprise the brain (Malabou, 2008). As neuronal pathways in the brain are subject to change, the brain is plastic. Plasticity in the brain renders it malleable and capable of adapting to changes. This ability to adapt based on feedback makes brain development epigenetic, meaning that habit, experience, and education play a critical role in the formation and life of neuronal connections (Malabou, 2021). However, with the development of AI in the past decade, computers have also acquired the ability to process and respond to environmental stimuli, enabling them to undergo a similar type of epigenetic process. This calls to question the legitimacy of the claim that plasticity proscribes any comparison between the neuronal brain and machines. In Morphing Intelligence, Malabou states that the Blue Brain project is able to replicate the functional principles of the living brain, thereby narrowing the gap between humans and AI (Malabou, 2021). However, in this context, the very metaphor of the “blue brain”, intended to facilitate understanding of the synaptic chip, is misleading. 

By creating an analogy between the human brain and computers, Malabou is optimistically assuming that humans have complete understanding of the neurological features of the brain and are therefore able to “replicate” its architecture. However, we currently know very little about the functional process of the brain beyond its reasoning capabilities. Additionally, the understanding of humans and AI based on this analogy equates thinking with computation, thereby neglecting the role of consciousness and oversimplifying the human cognitive process. The analogy between brains and computers mask the biological complexity of the brain and mistakenly ignores characteristics of intelligence other than abstract reasoning (Bruder, 2020). In her second book Morphing Intelligence, Malabou is limited in her evaluation of the relation of consciousness to biological plasticity. Given our current understanding of the brain’s functionality, we are incapable of imbuing synaptic chips with consciousness. In this regard, current AI is only capable of abstract reasoning and optimization based on the data it gathers. Intelligence is the ability to accomplish complex goals, while consciousness is the subjective experience in the process of solving problems. Although AI is capable of accomplishing a certain task and optimizing its ability to complete that task based on environmental feedback, it lacks consciousness. Humans are able to accomplish various complex goals with the help of tools and capable of experiencing different emotions during this process. Because humans can understand the purpose of their actions and the actions themselves, we may arrive at the conclusion that plasticity in humans is capable of supporting both intelligence and consciousness. AI based on machine learning or deep learning can also accomplish complex goals, but they are incapable of having any emotional response to the process, nor can they understand what they are doing. Here, the ability to have an emotional response to and reflect on the action itself is critical in biological plasticity, because “in its anatomical structure, the brain conserves organizations that attest to an erratic evolutionary past” rather than simply taking procedures to optimize its functional efficiency (Gould, 2020). Humans choose to take certain actions and incline towards a particular way of being based on their subjective consciousness, as opposed to purely abstract reasoning. Thinking cannot be understood as merely abstract reasoning, nor can plasticity be understood as simply the reactive response to environmental stimuli. Thinking is a complex reaction  involving consciousness, upon which plasticity is dependent on. 

By extending our analysis past the surface level analogy of the computer as a brain, we may proceed to further analyze the current differences between humans and AI. In What we should do with our brain and Morphing Intelligence, Malabou’s distinction between plasticity and flexibility facilitates the differentiation between humans and AI, inviting readers to identify the differences between biological plasticity in humans and technological flexibility in AI. Malabou differentiates between the two concepts by stating that “plasticity is a mechanism for adapting, while flexibility is a mechanism for submitting” (Malabou, 2008). While plasticity in humans is a process whereby the “original model or standard is progressively erased”, technological flexibility is the ability of AI to respond to a range of environmental stimuli so as to achieve the original programmed goal (Malabou, 2008). Currently, synaptic chips and transformer models in the filed of AI are only capable of iterating on a set of pre-defined goals, or “taking form” based on environmental input in the form of inputted data. Plasticity means, on one hand, the capacity to receive form, and on the other, the ability to give form. This ability to challenge and update stored information or goals is a characteristic exclusive to humans. In this sense, only humans are capable of maintaining the tension between the creation and annihilation of form as suggested by Malabou in What should we do with our brain (Malabou, 2008). In the future, developments in AI may drive technological flexibility beyond simply the taking of form based on pre-programmed responses to environmental stimuli, to an extent where it is indistinguishable from biological plasticity, but until then, plasticity and consciousness still differentiates humans from AI. 

In conclusion, Malabou’s analysis of biological plasticity invites readers to contemplate the differences between humans and AI, but her focus on surface level metaphors of the computer as a human brain impedes effective differentiation between biological plasticity and technological flexibility, making it difficult to realize what makes humans truly unique compared to AI. When AI is analyzed in light of its intricacies and limitations, we may recognize that the difference between biological plasticity and technological flexibility still exist. As AI continues its development and subverts previous conceptions concerning what defines intellect, humans also ought to explore the mechanism under which the brain functions, thereby gaining a more complete comprehension of how we think as well as what truly differentiates us from AI. 

References:
Bruder, Johannes. "Intelligence Has Always Been Artificial." Queen's Quarterly, vol. 127, no. 1, spring 2020, pp. 84+. Gale Literature Resource Center, link.gale.com/apps/doc/A621405681/LitRC?u=anon~4a42bfb2&sid=googleScholar&xid=a0ae7b95. Accessed 8 Dec. 2022.
“Chat.openai.com.” Chat GPT Open AI, 2022, https://chat.openai.com/chat. 
Dharmendra S. Modha, Rajagopal Ananthanarayanan, Steven K. Esser, Anthony Ndirango, Anthony J. Sherbondy, Raghavendra Singh, "Cognitive Computing", Communications of the ACM, vol.54, no.8, p.62-71, 2011.
Gould, Stephen Jay. The Mismeasure of Man. W. Ross MacDonald School Research Services Library, 2016. 
Malabou, Catherine, et al. What Should We Do with with Our Brain? Fordham University Press, 2008. 
Malabou, Catherine, and Shread Carolyn P T. Morphing Intelligence: From IQ Measurement to Artificial Brains. Columbia University Press, 2021.