---
title: "Eat Less Meat, Save the Planet?"
date: 2022-12-01
author: Terry Chen
---

The slogan “Eat Less Meat, Save the Planet” appears on the advertisements of many plant-based products. While there is still ongoing debate as to whether shifting to a plant-based diet is our only option, companies like Impossible Foods are attracting more people to try plant-based alternatives, claiming that their products use 92% less water, produce 91% less GreenHouse Gas (GHG) emissions, and take up 96% less land compared to meat production (Impossible Foods, 2023). However, are plant-based meats necessarily more sustainable, or is it the method of production that matters? To fully analyze the environmental impact of meat production and whether plant-based products are as sustainable as they claim, this essay will focus on evaluating the effectiveness of current Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) methods used by Impossible Foods in their comparison with traditional meat producers such as JBS and White Oak Pastures.

As one of the leading producers of plant-based meat substitutes, Impossible Foods was founded in 2011 with the mission of “making the global food system truly sustainable by eliminating the need to make food from animals” (Impossible Foods, 2023). Since then, they have introduced various plant-based alternatives to meats including beef, pork, and chicken. Among their range of products, the Impossible Burger is said to produce between 87% and 96% less environmental impact compared to a conventional ground beef burger (Impossible Burger Environmental Life Cycle Assessment, 2019). However, the statistics presented by Impossible Foods illustrating the benefits of producing plant-based meat are limited by the over-simplification and generalization of the LCA in meat production. 

The LCA is an analysis technique to assess environmental impacts associated with all the stages of a product's life, from raw material extraction to the processing, manufacture, distribution, and usage stages (ScienceDirect Topics, 2023). As the process is extremely complicated and time consuming, researchers have resorted to simplifying the calculation process, deriving default values from previously collected data and removing procedures that are difficult to standardize. This simplification is ideal for settings such as plant-based meat production or industrialized farming, as there is usually a standardized production procedure and controlled environment. However, this becomes a drawback when assessing sustainable farming methods such as pasture rotation in regenerative farming. Unlike the industrialized production methods of companies like JBS, meat producers like White Oak Pastures practice regenerative farming and allow livestock to roam and graze on grasslands, forests, or hills. By doing so, the animals are interacting with a complex environmental ecosystem where each area of land, vegetation, and water system may differ. Using default data instead of data based on actual field sampling and neglecting the complex biogeochemical cycle during the LCA would yield results significantly different from reality.

As a result of the complexity and cost of performing LCAs on complex environmental ecosystems, little research has been done on regenerative farming. However, more complete LCAs have been performed on industrialized meat production systems. As a result, plant-based meat companies like Impossible Foods take advantage of this by intentionally choosing to only compare the environmental impact of their production to industrialized meat production, thereby generalizing all meat production as industrialized production which has a larger environmental footprint. By doing so, they could easily illustrate how sustainable their methods are compared to their counterparts. Afterall, the rationale is that producing plant based items for direct human consumption is less resource intensive (De Ron et al., 2017).
Most LCAs tend to overlook the soil carbon sink while calculating the carbon footprint of agricultural products. The soil carbon sink is the ability of soil to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through photosynthesis in plants and sequester it stably. This is important, as the soil is a critical component of the carbon cycle and different farming practices directly determine whether the soil acts as a source of carbon emissions or a carbon sink. By leaving out this critical component in the LCA, plant-based meat companies are more likely to be assessed as having lower emissions compared to farmed meat. 

The benchmark for comparison for the Impossible Burger is Nebraska grass-fed and grain-finished beef, which is a typical example of how beef is produced in an industrialized meat production setting. During meat production, calves graze for six months to a year before being sent to feedlots where they are confined in stalls with limited space and fattened with grain-based feeds. During the grazing process, cows continuously graze on one section of land. Because the benchmark used in this comparison does not involve regenerative farming and the soil carbon sink, Impossible Foods is able to announce its Impossible Burger as having 89% less carbon emissions compared to its counterparts (Impossible Foods, 2023). 

However, although companies like White Oak Pastures may be less efficient compared to industrialized meat producers, their regenerative farming methods could actually serve to help mitigate climate change. Regenerative farming differs from industrial methods in focusing on biodiversity and mimicking natural ecological mechanisms, rather than specialization and intensification (Rowntree et al., 2020). According to a research conducted by Michigan State University, not only can the adoption of improved grazing management facilitate soil carbon sequestration, but that the beef production system may serve as an overall GHG sink (Stanley et al., 2018). The incorporation of soil carbon sequestration into the LCA process reduced net GHG emissions of pasture rotation systems by 80%, resulting in a footprint 66% lower than industrialized production systems, meaning that the farmland is acting as a carbon sink and that there is actually net absorption of carbon by the soil (Rowntree et al., 2020). 

If companies like Impossible Foods also take into consideration soil health while producing soy, they would also be able to emit zero carbon during the production process or even allow their farmland to act as a carbon sink. However, plant-based food companies currently do not have the incentive to do so. In fact, to minimize production costs, the ingredients of plant-based meat often come from traditional mass agriculture using herbicides and fertilizers. Impossible Foods uses soy genetically modified to resist herbicide toxicity, claiming that their method “helps control weeds without more toxic weed control agents or over-reliance on tillage, which drives soil carbon loss” (Impossible Foods, 2023). However, according to the  Farming Systems Trial by Rodale Institute, no-till farming based on herbicide-resistant crops merely reduces carbon emissions from the soil (Farming Systems Trial, n.d.). To fundamentally improve soil health and turn soil from a source of carbon emissions to a carbon sink, companies need to practice herbicide-free, organic no-till farming.

Furthermore, although the process of performing a LCA on the water footprint is already a sophisticated process, it is far from being representative of the actual water cycle in nature. Currently, most water footprint calculation frameworks separate water into three categories: green water, blue water, and gray water. Green water refers to precipitation stored in the root zone of soil and used by plants while blue water refers to water sourced from surface or groundwater, and gray water refers to the amount of fresh water needed to treat pollutants and maintain water quality standards (Water Footprint Network, 2023). Because green water has never left the environment, some researchers believe its impact is negligible, and as the change in gray water is hard to estimate, it is often left out of the calculation. In the end, calculations of agricultural water footprints are often simplified to only take into account blue water, which is easier to monitor and calculate. According to these simplifications, Impossible Foods claim to use 92% less water than grain-fed beef in the Impossible Burger. However, the soy needed for the production of plant-based meat is from monoculture. This production method requires extensive irrigation and often leads to soil compaction resulting in negative impact on the environment. During heavy rainfall, rainwater either accumulates in puddles and is lost to evaporation, or causes erosion while flowing over the land. This means that producers not only have to irrigate fields more frequently, but are also more likely to suffer losses in the case of droughts and floods.

The regenerative farming methods practiced by White Oak Pastures provide a solution. As regenerative rancher Gabe Brown testified before congress, “an increase of 1% in soil carbon correlates with a capacity to hold water by 170,000 liters per hectare” (Silver Creek Capital, 2021). In rotational farming systems, water can be quickly absorbed by the soil and enter underground water reservoirs or lakes and rivers. This method of improving the water cycle cannot only replenish water resources but also adjust rainfall and microclimates, thereby allowing farmers to improve their ability to cope against extreme weather conditions and maintain a stable level of income. 

Comparing the production methods of Impossible Foods against JBS and White Oak Pastures, we may see that although the production of plant-based meat is more sustainable compared to industrialized meat production, the limitations of current LCA methods fail to recognize the full benefits of regenerative farming. However, while companies like White Oak Pastures may provide a sustainable approach to meat production, there is no single solution that maximizes production while eliminating all environmental impact. Both plant-based meat production and livestock production can negatively impact or benefit the environment. The claim that all plant-based products are more sustainable is not valid, as although eating a purely plant-based diet is certainly more environmentally friendly, if customers consume heavily processed plant-based meat, it may be less environmentally friendly than eating meat products produced sustainably. In the future, consumers need to think in a more nuanced way about how to consume sustainably and producers should begin to take a more rigorous approach to assessing their environmental impact during production.

References: 
De Ron, A. M., Sparvoli, F., Pueyo, J. J., & Bazile, D. (2017). Editorial: Protein Crops: Food and Feed for the Future. Frontiers in Plant Science, 8, 105. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00105
Water Footprint (2023). What is a water footprint? Retrieved February 11, 2023, from https://waterfootprint.org/en/water-footprint/what-is-water-footprint/
Farming Systems Trial. (n.d.). Rodale Institute. Retrieved February 11, 2023, from https://rodaleinstitute.org/science/farming-systems-trial/
Impossible Burger Environmental Life Cycle Assessment 2019. (2019). Retrieved February 11, 2023, from https://impossiblefoods.com/sustainable-food/burger-life-cycle-assessment-2019
Impossible Foods | Sustainable Food for a Better Planet. (2023). Retrieved February 6, 2023, from https://impossiblefoods.com/sustainable-food
Life Cycle Assessment—An overview | ScienceDirect Topics. (2023). Retrieved February 11, 2023, from https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/earth-and-planetary-sciences/life-cycle-assessment
Rowntree, J. E., Stanley, P. L., Maciel, I. C. F., Thorbecke, M., Rosenzweig, S. T., Hancock, D. W., Guzman, A., & Raven, M. R. (2020). Ecosystem Impacts and Productive Capacity of a Multi-Species Pastured Livestock System. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2020.544984
Silver Creek Capital. (2021). Gabe Brown: Testimony to House Agriculture Committee. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCOtoF7F0EE
